Matthew 26 starting in verse 36.
Then Jesus went with his disciples to a place called Gethsemane, and he said to them, sit here while I go over there and pray.
He took Peter and the two sons of Zebedee along with him, and he began to be sorrowful and troubled.
Then he said to them, my soul is overwhelmed with sorrow to the point of death.
Stay here and keep watch with me.
Going a little farther, he fell with his face to the ground and prayed, my father, if it is possible, may this cup be taken from me, yet not as I will, but as you will.
Then he returned to his disciples and he found them sleeping.
Couldn't you men keep watch with me for just one hour?
Yes, Peter.
Watch and pray so that you will not fall into temptation.
The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.
He went away a second time and prayed, my father, if it is not possible for this cup to be taken away unless I drink it, may your will be done.
When he came back, he again found them sleeping because their eyes were heavy.
So he left them and he went away once more and he prayed a third time, saying the same thing.
Then he returned to the disciples and said to them, are you still sleeping and resting?
Look, the hour has come.
and the Son of Man is delivered into the hands of sinners.
Rise.
Let us go.
Here comes my betrayer.
This is the word of the Lord.
In Mary Oliver's latest collection of poetry and prose, in one of her essays, she compares a religious monk to a wild fox, noting that they both have this much in common.
Each of them
wears a habit, a monk's daily uniform, which all monks and nuns of every religious order wear all have forsaken fashion.
They just wear the exact same thing every day.
That uniform is called a habit because that's exactly what it is.
A monk gets dressed just like you and I do.
They just put what they wear each day on autopilot.
And a fox also wears a habit.
It's the same orange coat every single day.
It just grows a bit.
thicker in the winter and lighter in the summer.
Likewise, monks and foxes both live by intentional habits of working and resting, preparing for winter, delighting in the summer.
But have you ever seen a fox stressed getting ready for winter time?
Or a monk overwhelmed or rushed at all that they have to get done?
Mary Oliver's thinking about all this while watching a fox on a hillside near her house as it frolics and dances around creation joyfully.
This time of year, foxes will be building dens, dense and warm enough for storing food and keeping warm.
But the needs and demands of the fox's life, the habits that she lives by, seem to be freeing her to live playfully and joyfully.
And Mary wonders if monks might be onto the same thing.
She writes, men and women of faith who pray, that is, who come to a certain assigned place at definite times and are not a bash to go down on their knees, the habit then has become their life.
What some might call the restrictions of the daily office, they find to be an opportunity to foster the inner life.
This evening marks the close of a prayer-shaped life, the teaching series that has carried us throughout the fall.
an invitation to the slowest growing, sweetest tasting fruit of prayer, not what happens immediately because I pray, and there's very real implications to that, but instead, who prayer makes me after years and decades of all my amends?
But of course, a prayer-shaped life comes from prayer-shaped days, which is why here at Bridgestone Church, we live by the ancient rhythm of the
early church in the morning we pray scripture at midday we pray compassion and in the evening we pray the examine and it is that the evening rhythm of prayer that we're going to give our attention to tonight couldn't you stay awake with me even for an hour
That's the repeated refrain of Jesus to his disciples on his final night.
In Gethsemane, Jesus is using two seemingly different words, totally interchangeably, pray and watch.
Look back with me at your Bibles, Matthew chapter 26, verse 36.
Then Jesus went with his disciples to a place called Gethsemane, and he said to them, sit here while I go over there and pray.
He took Peter and two of the sons of Zebedee along with him and he began to be sorrowful and troubled.
Then he said to them, my soul is overwhelmed with sorrow to the point of death.
Stay here and keep watch with me."
So Jesus goes to pray and then he refers to what he's doing as keeping watch.
Jump down to verse 40.
Then he returned to his disciples and found them sleeping.
Couldn't you men keep watch with me for one hour?
He asked Peter.
Watch and pray so you will not fall into temptation.
Now, this word watch, it is the Greek Gregoreo, and it appears frequently throughout the New Testament, and it can equally be translated as keep watch or stay awake.
In fact, a number of English Bibles translated that way.
Could you stay awake with me even for an hour?
And that's why later in the passage, Jesus seems repeatedly disappointed to find his disciples sleeping
when he's invited them to keep watch with him, to pray with him.
Now, of course, there's nothing wrong with sleep in the literal sense, but here in Gethsemane, sleeping is being used synonymously with prayerlessness.
And this isn't the first time Jesus has talked this way or used this metaphor, Luke chapter 12.
It will be good for those servants whose master finds them watching when he comes.
Truly I tell you he will dress himself to serve and will have them recline at the table and he will come to wait on them.
It will be good for those servants whose master finds them ready even if he comes in the middle of the night or toward daybreak.
This exact same teaching is recorded in Matthew and Mark.
Only in Matthew's version, Jesus follows it closely with a related story about 10 brides, all staying awake through the night waiting for the groom.
Only five of them keep watch all through the night for the groom's arrival and five don't.
The writers of the New Testament pick up on this pairing, praying and staying awake.
concept is repeated in the New Testament letters to the Colossians, Thessalonians, Ephesians, Romans, Corinthians, and in John's revelation.
So Peter, Paul, and John, who collectively write the bulk of the New Testament, all recall this final lesson from Jesus about prayer.
The one who prays stays awake.
The one who doesn't falls asleep.
Staying awake is the primary biblical motif for prayer throughout the New Testament.
But this isn't a new idea and it's not exclusive to the New Testament either.
A prayer is personified as a night watchman in Ezekiel chapter 3, Habakkuk 2, Isaiah 21, 26, 56, and 62.
A night watchman in the ancient world was someone who stays awake while everyone else, the whole village, the entire surrounding society is asleep.
Couldn't you stay awake with me even for an hour?
When Jesus asked that question again and again and again to his apprentices on his final night, he was speaking their cultural language.
He was speaking biblical language to ask this simple question, can't you pray with me?
Prayer is synonymous with staying awake and asleep in this sense doesn't mean literally snoozing.
It means living my life on autopilot.
Every human being has an autopilot, a way of sleepwalking through their own life, a way of being that recapitulates a false story, a false self, and a false hope.
Stay awake or you'll live your days drowsily wandering through a false story.
And the false story that you, my friends, uniquely, magnetically gravitate toward, it isn't the product of your latest adult fantasies.
It was given to you before you had a say in the matter all the way back in your childhood.
Our parents react to us in certain ways and in our formative years and our tiny forming little brains then interpret that as mommy won't love you unless you eat your veggies or make the cast of the Christmas pageant or include your sister or be a good little girl.
Daddy won't love you unless you get a hidden little league or clean your room or come home with a good report card.
Now of course in most cases our parents aren't delivering those messages to us literally and outright but just with a
disinterested glance, or pattern of impatience, or well-meaning comment that gets bent and interpreted the wrong way, how tiny little forming brains cannot take the nuance and interpret messages from the relational environments of our families of origin.
From a false story, we then grow into a false self, or what the New Testament calls an old self, or what Genesis depicts as fig leaves.
The false self can be many things, but it is always a way, it's always a way that I try to identify myself or define myself apart from the God who made me.
We reach for an identity through the accumulation of wealth or accomplishment or reputation or adventure or power or whatever.
It's always an attempt at love.
Becoming lovable in my own eyes, or becoming lovable in the eyes of my preferred audience.
The lie that the serpent planted in the human race first was a deception about love.
About where love is found, how it's kept, and what makes me lovable.
The false self is whatever disguise you wear to try to drum up your own lovableness.
Albert Ha summarizes the false self in what he calls the 10 empty peas.
Pleasure?
power, praise, prestige, position, popularity, people, productivity, possessions, and perfection.
What are each one of those?
There are means for acquiring love.
They're an attempt to get by my merit.
Under my control, God gave me first by His grace and in my weakness, love.
There's an identity within each and every one of you brothers and sisters that has borne out of fear, not love.
And that person is the fallacy planted by the crafty deceptive serpent in your inner being, not the fearfully, wonderfully made person that God formed first and knows best.
That's your false self.
It's the identity within you born of fear, not love.
from a false story inherited from my family of origin.
I grow into an adulthood as a false self and ultimately I'm conned then into banking my hope on a false hope.
I search for satisfaction somewhere that I can get it again and again and drips and drops but I can never keep it in any satisfying way.
It's the possessions I accumulate that make me feel secure, the social or positional power I gather up that makes me feel strong.
It's the honor I gain from the adoring eyes of others that makes me feel seen.
It's the choice pleasures I chase and appetites that satiate my hunger for a moment but never satisfy me in any lasting way.
There is no amount of alcohol, no amount of sugar, no amount of sexual escapades that will ever calm that hunger inside of you.
That's what it looks like to go sleepwalking through life, to live your life
on your particular version of autopilot, you passively accept a script written for you by the serpent, a false story, a false self, and a false hope uniquely tailored to fit, no, to disguise you, the real you, the true you.
So how do I stay awake then?
Awake to my true story.
Wake to my true self, awake to my true and lasting hope.
How do I stay awake with Jesus?
Back in the 15th century in Spain, there was a soldier who dreamed of rising through the ranks and becoming a revered war hero.
And before you judge or dismiss that as a primitive desire, you got to keep in mind that 600 years ago, the national military was the titan of industry and status.
This longing is no different than a finance major today, dreaming of one day becoming an angel investor, or a chef dreaming of opening her own restaurant, or a writer dreaming of being published.
The Spanish soldier, this man, he came from a wealthy family with a taste for status and accolades.
So he came by his ambition, his false story, quite honestly, from his own family of origin.
The turning point in his life, though, happened through a debilitating injury.
He was injured on the battlefield in the year 1521 in the Spanish city of Pamplana, leaving him bedridden for nine months.
Just imagine that.
He's living in a world before screens, podcasts, or any form of streaming entertainment whatsoever.
In his parents' house, lying on the bed he grew up in for 274 days,
with no entertainment and no distraction.
And it was there in his own personal wilderness that he began to pray.
This man with no religious background or training whatsoever just started to pray.
And particularly as he prayed, he would review his day in the evening in the presence of the God that he was beginning to find in his own personal wilderness.
Nine months later, when he stood upright again, he was an entirely new person.
alive to a new story, living as a new self with completely new hope.
That young man, Ignatius of Loyola, then went on to found the Jesuit order and give his life of prayer away to the world.
His form of evening prayer then became codified as the prayer of examine and it serves to this day as the grounding and guiding rhythm of the Jesuits and is practiced much more broadly across traditions and cultures within the global Christian church.
So how do I stay awake?
awake the very way that Jesus invites me to in Gethsemane, awake the way that the New Testament authors remember and weave into letter after letter after letter written to communities of Jesus' apprentices, just like this one.
How do I stay awake to my story, myself, and my hope?
Will you slow down every evening and prayerfully examine your life one day at a time in partnership with the Holy Spirit?
That's how you keep yourself.
from the lull of life on your chosen version of autopilot, which brings us one last time to a very practical grounding framework, the when, how, and what of praying the examine.
Let's begin with when.
The evening is such a wonderful time of day.
In the evening, we put our work aside, we rest,
We eat, we laugh, we enjoy, we go out dancing, we go to the movies, we watch the game, we visit the restaurant.
The evening is a celebration of our humanity.
It's the liberation from the grind and the acknowledgement that I'm more than just my doing and producing.
I am a sacred being among other sacred beings.
Man, it feels good when the evening arrives, doesn't it?
Oh, I got to rush through there.
I'm about to get to it right after this.
I can't wait.
I'm getting excited right now.
And all of that good about the evening means it's the time of day when we either remember or we forget.
You see, all that's good about the evening also makes it the day's most tempting portion for us to misuse.
The evening tempts us to forget the day leaving behind our worries, escaping our stresses and strains into
two or three or four glasses of wine or seconds on ice cream after dinner, escaping into a show to veg out to or a party to attend, escaping into some form of entertainment or distraction, none of which are bad in and of themselves.
Jesus enjoyed a sharp glass of red, just asked the father of the bride, the wedding of Kaina.
Jesus, as for parties, he threw so many of them that the surrounding priest thought him unholy.
Jesus is not anti-entertainment, he's not anti-indulgence, God is no form of cosmic killjoy.
The trouble comes when we use food or drink, entertainment or distraction as a means to escape rather than as a means of integration.
The trouble comes when alcohol becomes a means for escaping reality rather than as a means for choosing reality among my neighbors.
When any form of the evening's goodness is used as a way to forget my stress, my obligations, my today, or my tomorrow, that's when we misuse or even abuse a gift that God gave us in the turning cycle of our days.
The sun to govern the day and the moon to govern the night.
That was God's very first act of creation, the first inspired idea that popped into the mind of the Creator that he brought into life and called the good.
Our days begin in the morning and they end at night.
in the post-industrial West.
According to God, though, and those who are shaped by His story, it's exactly the opposite of that.
The day begins when the sun sets.
Have you ever noticed that?
There was evening and there was morning, the first day.
It's the rhythm of creation.
There was evening, there was morning, the second, third, fourth, fifth, and sixth day.
Even Psalm 55 that we read a moment ago, Gavin just pointed out to me, what's the verse for memorizing?
evening, morning, and noon, I cry out to the Lord.
It begins at night.
You see, this is very important, but technical distinction that in the minds of Jesus, the Jewish ancestors, and all who follow Jesus, the day begins at night.
View through the lens of modern culture, the evening is a reward for a day's hard work.
It's a time that I let my guard down and let loose.
It's a time to forget.
View through the lens of Scripture, though, the evening is the time when work ceases and hospitality increases.
We grow internally quiet, reflective, and communal, gathering with others in need of rest and recovery, communing with others who want from us something other than are doing, producing, and working.
In Jesus' mind, the evening is not a reward for work.
The evening is worship from which true work is born.
The night isn't a stillness we retreat into after we've worn ourselves out all day.
It's a stillness we emerge from so that we can engage in the day creatively as God's image bearers.
We begin each one of our days by the stillness, rest, company, and eventually the sleep of the evening and only after such rest.
The sacred kind of rest.
that allows you to recover your story yourself and your hope only after such rest does all of my moving and making my doing and producing find its proper place in God's world and become truly constructive.
The evening is a time to start each day with rest so I can live each day awake.
And that means that the evening is not a time to forget it's the opposite of that.
The evening is for remembering.
One of the great battles of the spiritual life is remembering.
In fact, remember is among the most common biblical commands.
It's second only to fear not.
Because fears, threats, competing affections, and distractions, all of these forces are conspiring to make us forgetful, constantly losing the plot of our own redemption stories, even while we're living them.
Remember, Yahweh says to Israel,
again and again and again.
Right between the Red Sea and the Promised Land, remember in the years between exile and return, remember in the space between every promise and that promise is fulfillment.
Remember, remember, remember, remember.
Memory is such a vital spiritual tool because God saves.
but he doesn't do on course.
Let me explain.
God delivered Israel from one oppressor by 10 miraculous plagues.
He delivered Israel from their next oppressor by instructing them to seek the welfare of the city into which they had been sent to exile.
Both resulted in their deliverance in God's faithfulness.
Same result, very different methods, right?
God saves.
but he doesn't do all in course.
And that pattern goes on and on and on and on from one end of scripture to the other.
God saves, but the method of his saving changes and changes and changes and changes, it's as unique as the circumstances we get lost in.
So how am I supposed to maintain hope then when I've been on the job search for six months now and it's one dead end after another?
or I've been passed over for promotion after promotion after promotion, or I keep bouncing from one industry to the next unfulfilled.
How am I supposed to maintain help when my kids getting bullied at school, or fell in with the wrong crowd, or fell behind academically?
And I've been patient and present, but it's just not getting any better.
How am I supposed to maintain help with my careers in chaos?
Or my families in chaos?
My marriages in chaos?
Or my friendships are in chaos?
Or my plans just falling apart?
You got to remember.
God saves.
But He is no one trick pony.
The saving He does next time will be altogether different than the saving He did last time.
But strength only rises for those who have learned to wait upon the Lord.
Don't forget your big and small trouble in the evening.
Do not escape your troubles or escape the chaos of your life.
Remember that God saves.
Invite God into your chaos each and every evening.
Sometimes he will perish you then like a savior to rescue and pull you right out.
Other times he will walk you right through your chaos like a good shepherd with a rod and staff at your right and left.
God saves.
all those who call upon his name.
So when you're on your way home from work each day, whether that's commuting in rush hour traffic or just walking down the creaky stairs from your home office into the family living room, if it's boiling water for tonight's family dinner or
clocking out and hanging up your apron.
If it's the bell ringing in the school day being dismissed or walking from your last class back across campus to your dorm room, however you mark the end of your work day, in the imagination of Jesus, you're just waking up.
Your day's just beginning.
Some people practice the examine as a ritual of transition between their work and their rest.
They repurpose their commute, whatever the equivalent is for you, into a cue to pray.
Others practice the examine as the very last act of their day when their head is laying on the pillow.
There's no prescription, just choose what works for your unique circumstance and put it into practice.
But I would just say this, that any time you're cultivating a new habit,
like a new way of praying, and a new interval in the day.
It always helps to start by pairing it with an existing habit or ritual in your life.
I say, I'm gonna take my commute, and I'm gonna begin to use it to pray rather than to listen to this or that.
I'm gonna take the first minutes, I lay my head on the pillow, and before I crack open the novel, I'm gonna review my day in prayer with God.
What matters is that you begin your days in the evening with a ritual of remembrance,
remembering the story that God is writing in which you are finding yourself again today, remembering the self that he says you are, not the puffed up or deflated version you have been made by the days passing hours, and remembering the hope that he offers you, not the trivial hope that you're tempted to escape into this evening.
That's how I choose God's design, not the serpent's deception for the days that I live.
So that takes us from when
to how, how do I pray the examine?
Well, traditionally, the prayer of examine has been summarized in five major movements, but for the sake of simplicity, I think we can understand it just in these four.
Review, resonate, repent, and request.
Here is the prayer of examine.
First, you just reviewed the day with God, which is absolutely as simple as it sounds.
Just begin your prayer by telling God everything you did today.
from the way that you felt when you first woke up to the workout that you did or skipped, to what you ate for breakfast, to what time the baby woke up, to the errands that you ran, and the phone call that you made, and the text banter you exchanged with your friends.
Just imagine that God is a friend that you're sitting down to at evening tea, and he says, okay, tell me everything you did today from when you woke up till you sat down in that chair, go, and then just start telling him.
But as you're recounting your day, pay particular attention to every opportunity you have for gratitude.
What big or small do I possess from the hours of this day to be grateful for?
A rowdy house full of loud little ones that is mind-numbing to David.
Man, you're going to miss it when it's gone.
Or a kind word you receive from a friend or a smile offered you in a stranger.
the health to be able to stand up when you woke up today or to walk from A to B, the means to choose what you ate or drank today.
Psalm 104 says that Thanksgiving is the way that we enter God's court.
It is the inner room where he lives and how we get access.
So inviting God to fill my evening with his presence just starts with thank you, thank you, thank you.
But gratitude isn't so much like wooing God nearer to us.
It's actually bringing out our true self to be exposed to God's presence, which is always near to us.
Gratitude is how we woo our true selves up to God, because negative rumination comes a whole lot easier to every last one of us than gratitude does.
Alex Corb of the University of UCLA, he says that we can experience mixed emotions.
However, he has discovered that psychologically speaking, it is impossible to hold positive and negative feelings in your inner being at the same time.
In other words, it is psychologically impossible to feel grateful and wanting simultaneously.
Isn't that fascinating?
Even more, it takes less than three seconds for shame to form in your brain, but it takes 90 seconds for affirmation to be calcified and formed in your brain.
In other words, if you want to be shaped into your true self, you are going to have to intentionally return to and ruminate on the moments when your true self has been wooed forth each and every day.
The next two movements resonate and repent there, both simple quick movements that are born out of the day's review.
Once you have reviewed the day, it should be pretty easy to resonate, meaning to identify when on this day did I know God's presence in my ordinary life.
Was there something I saw like that one tree that was beaming bright yellow against the gray autumn sky, or the genuine delight on a friend's face when she saw me coming and greeted me?
Was it something I said, like a word of blessing or prophecy that I received from God and delivered in love or something I didn't say like that?
One petty, snide remark that I could have made to my spouse that surely would have resulted in a blow-up and for once I bit my tongue.
Something that I read in Scripture this morning or heard in like the O365 that landed like a personal invitation in my inner being.
Something I did like write a card to a friend or when I helped a student with homework or when I spent a few extra minutes with that one patient during a busy hospital round.
If I had just like one moment from today when I was walking in step with the spirit of the living God, what would it be?
And then once you've resonated, then repent.
That's the other end of the spectrum, meaning when on this day did I miss or ignore God's presence in my ordinary life.
Sometimes repentance is practiced by straightforward confession.
It's just naming something to God that I did or didn't do today.
The pattern that I gave into again, I lost that battle again today.
Or the need I saw but ignored, I chose myself first again today.
Confession is how we practice remembering what we believe first, but are so prone to forget that my salvation, meaning my fullest, present living, rests on Jesus' perfection, not on mine.
It rests on his inexhaustible forgiveness, not my holiness streak, on his choosing me every single moment of every single day, not me choosing him every single moment of every single day.
Other times repentance is practiced by mercifully holding someone before God.
that I am prone or tempted to chip away at in judgment, praying grace and blessing over someone that I want to judge and critique internally.
It's likely not difficult for you to know who that person is in your life at present.
They probably shoot to mind right away.
Repenting includes praying for your enemies to borrow Jesus' lingo.
There is no more powerful force for believing God's grace for me than practicing God's grace
for others.
The truth is that the most vindictive, cruel, judgmental people in this world are almost always also the most self-critical, self-hating, ashamed people in this world.
There is a reciprocal relationship between our capacity to hold our personal sin in God's loving presence and to hold others that we know in God's compassionate gaze.
It is really, really difficult.
It might be impossible to find a church community that is slow to sin.
But a church community that's quick to repent, that we can become.
And I think that's what we're really looking for anyway.
And all that brings us to the final movement of the prayer of examine, which is request.
In light of all you've collected from today, just pray one simple request for the next 24 hours of your life.
One variety of the Spirit's fruit that you're asking God to grow in.
One way that you want to show up when you arrive home tonight to your roommates or your spouse or your children.
One way that you want to show up when you arrive at work or school tomorrow.
Once you've recollected your day, there's probably a request that wasn't already on your mind, that just sort of rises to the top.
Name that before God.
Trusting that it hears you and longs to give good gifts to those who ask.
Richard P summarizes the exam in this way.
In the end, the prayer of examine is about noticing.
Noticing the good gifts God gives us, noticing the presence of God in our lives, and noticing the ways we fail God.
When we notice, we become more conscious.
When we become more conscious, we grow.
Finally, and most importantly, all this brings us to what?
What is the prayer of examine supposed to do to me?
Practice evening after evening after evening.
What's the point?
What is the shaping influence of this prayer?
Well, the prayer of examine is the prayer of surely awakening to my true story, to my true self and to my true hope.
I'll just take those one at a time as we close.
First, my true story.
When we read in Christ Scripture in the morning, we were practicing seeing God in the ancient story of our spiritual ancestors.
When we prayed the exam in the evening, we were practicing seeing God in the current story of my day to day life.
In her book, The Joy of Listening to God, Joyce Huggett describes an acquaintance of her name, Joan, who was, she was friends with my association, but not personally.
Joan's mom had a sudden medical episode.
She collapsed and had to be taken to the hospital.
And Joyce just couldn't shake the nudge that she was meant to go and visit Joan's mother.
So she assumed she was to go to the hospital and pray for some kind of divine miraculous healing.
But then as she was making her way into the hospital, she happened to notice this statue that was out front of it, of a shepherd holding a sheep.
And she said this deep kind of inner knowing, this little whisper that she'd come to associate with the voice of God, say, describe the statue to her.
She began to reason with God in prayer.
Well, Joan's mother isn't even a Christian.
This isn't going to make any sense to her for me just to describe this statue and say it was on my mind.
And to all of her rebuttals, God just was silent.
Praying the examine is the practice of seeing like Jesus, who claimed that his source of spiritual power was, I only do what I see the Father doing.
And if I am to learn to live like Jesus, I first have to learn to see like Jesus, which means to see freed of my best intention and freed of the boundaries of my comfort zone.
I too have to see what the Father is doing in order to join in and take action on what the Father is doing.
So Joyce visits Joan's mom for a while, and then finally, reluctantly on the way out, she says, hey, I noticed this statue on the way in, and I just wanted to describe to you what it looks like and what I think it means.
After this first visit, Joan's mother ends up needing to stay in the hospital for quite some time, and Joyce continues to visit her.
The two of them built a friendship over the course of weeks while she lies there bedridden.
And then one day on one of these visits, Joan's mother says to Joyce, I think I'm ready to die now that I know the good shepherd.
And she says, what do you mean?
Well, the very first time you visited me, you described that statue.
And I just couldn't stop thinking about it after you left.
Just laying here for hours, I began to pray to the God that you described depicted in that statue.
And I felt like he was hearing me.
And as I kept praying to him, I felt like he was speaking to me.
And I realized today that I know the good shepherd and I'm filled with peace.
And so I think I'm ready to die.
She passed away a couple of days after that.
That's what the examine is supposed to do to me.
It is supposed to free me of all of my false self that I might live in partnership with God today.
As for myself, God is the one who knit me together and breathed life into my lungs.
He's numbered my days and he's hid my true self away in Christ.
All to say, God knows me better than I know myself.
He loves me more than I will ever love myself.
And so living attentive to God is the restoration of my true self.
One evening recently, I was praying to examine on my commute home from work, and a memory shot to mind.
When I was a kid, me and my brothers used to play by building forts in the backyard.
We would gather sticks and tear branches from the trees at the edge of our family's property and then some of the sticks we would bend and then use rubber bands to try to like make homemade bows and there was this one grove of bamboo shoots and we had these little Swiss army knives and we would cut bamboo shoots and try to sharpen them into arrows.
All of our play I see now as an adult in recollection was technically work.
And all of our work was profoundly playful.
And I thought about my own kids and about how their leisure and labor are just one and the same.
Like I've never once heard my seven-year-old sign and say to one of his buddies, whoo, what a day.
Art class was a bear, was it not?
Gosh, I just need to take a load off.
Do you want to come over for a drink?
I got some Capri Suns left over.
We just pop a straw in a bag and call it a night, you know?
No, kids, they play, they build, they invent, they engage, they work playfully.
And I did too when I was young, but I don't anymore.
Now I have two modes.
They're very distinct from one another.
I have work mode and I have rest mode.
I labor and I leisure, but not at the same time.
The two never overlap.
You know, Jesus said, truly, I tell you, unless you change and become like little children, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven.
And I started to wonder if this might be part of what he had in mind.
Like the recovery of playfulness in my labor and the recovery of intention in my leisure.
Until I'm the same in both places, the same joy, delight, and freedom on Friday night and on Monday morning at work and at play.
And I started to think about Jesus and how
He was just the same at the temple and the table.
He was the same at the wedding feast as he was fasting at the Samaritan well.
He was the same at the Passover feast where he broke bread and celebrated with the disciples as he wasn't got semi where he fell on his knees and asked them to stay awake.
No division between his labor and his leisure.
And I started to think about the creation that was all around me.
And you know, natural creation is not efficient.
The seasons of our year seem to carry very little for our calendars.
Autumn arrives early some years, and it comes late others.
Occasionally spring arrives and starts and stops, and then sometimes it just stargles the frozen world awake all at once.
And creation is not in a hurry.
You cannot see the birth and death of creation by staring at it.
You can't perceive it with your naked eye, but it's birth and death.
While it may be less dramatic, it's no less certain than yours in mine.
And creation is not concerned with performance or with productivity or with progress.
It is not measuring this year's growth against last year's growth.
It's not competing with its neighbors.
The oak tree is entirely unconcerned with how its growth is pacing against the cedars.
Creation is playful.
The maple inventing new tones of autumnal shades to light the world up with every fall.
And the evergreen tree, the fur, it waits patiently to beam emerald against winter's white blanket.
The bird delightfully collects for its nest.
It works and works and works to build a home for itself and its young, but it doesn't waste a second comparing the size of its nest to the other birds in the park or wondering if the construction is on schedule.
Just enjoying labor and leisure is one and the same.
And if the Creator made all of this and imbued it with His image, I began to wonder, and I prayed this very simple prayer at the close of my examine, oh God, could you make my labor and leisure one again?
Could you restore in me a little bit of that childlike life that I see in my children, that I see in Jesus, that I see in the world you made all around me?
Would you do that for me?
You see, that's what the examine does to me.
It frees me to live a little bit more of my God-knit, God-breathed, God-redeemed, true self today and tomorrow and the next day after that.
And then finally, hope.
The examine awakens you to a true hope because tradition of the prayer of examine has been prayed before sleep because it has been viewed and understood by all of our ancient ancestors as practicing your death.
I know.
It's a real downer after all the Capri Sun stuff, right?
Death is such a fascinating conundrum.
It is one of the very, very few experiences shared across language, culture, status, and era by all human beings, and yet the vast majority of modern people give little or no thought whatsoever to their death until it suddenly rudely intrudes on their lives.
We greet death as surprise strangers, not
Friends, Eugene Peterson claimed that the essential role of a pastor was to teach people to pray and teach people to die a good death.
St. Ignatius would say, those two are one and the same.
When we practice the exam in the evening, we are practicing surrendering our lives one day at a time.
We are laying down our accolades, all that I did well today, all that I was honored for, all that I was affirmed and awarded, because when it is all said and done, I can't take any of that with me.
We're also laying down all of our shortfalls.
All that are fumbled and foible today, the work that I didn't finish, the mistake that I made, the conversation I still need to have but keep avoiding, the tasks that I'm gonna have to pick back up tomorrow.
We lay all of that down to because one day our days are gonna run out and there will still be so much left to do and so much left to say.
Our lives will be surrendered, unfinished, or grasped and clawed for in our final moments.
Jesus himself made a startling statement when he was surrendering his own life.
He said, no one takes my life from me.
I lay it down.
Jesus claimed that his death was a free choice.
It was a willing surrender in his life.
His resurrection life was a shared intercessory gift, and we celebrate the resurrection life of Jesus, that He has taken the punctuation mark off the sentences at the end of our stories so that we get to go living on and on and on an endless number of days.
But how infrequently do we meditate on the way He said we could receive that life right now?
If you want to find your life, you're going to have to lose the one you've got.
If you wanna know resurrection from my tomb, you're gonna have to carry your own cross.
Pray the examine each and every day and you will slowly but surely prepare yourself to one day be laid on a hospital cup, surviving by machines, surrounded by the people that you loved earnestly but imperfectly with plenty of words left to say and so much work left to do, you will feel your life unfinished because it is.
This is not how he made it.
but you will not lie, they're straining against the dying light or grasping and clawing for more time or trying to get out every last word or finish every last task.
No, instead a smile will streak across your surrendered face and you will whisper one last prayer that goes something like, no one takes my life for me.
I lay it down.
Pray the examine each and every day and you
won't have to wait on the inevitability of your death or the promise of your resurrection.
Slowly but surely you will learn to choose death today before it chooses you.
And you also learn to live eternally today before he rides in on the clouds and calls you out of your tomb once and for all.
Praying the examine is the practice of hope.
Not hoping who I make myself and my eyes or anybody else's.
I can't keep that kind of hope, but hope that I learn to live by dying.
So the practice that we've been holding throughout this entire teaching series is prayer.
And this week, when we gather together in our bridge sense communities, the exercise we're going to engage is praying the examine in the evening.
And then as you go forth into your ordinary life, our invitation is for every last person who calls bridge town church home and this community family to live your days the ancient prayer shaped way in the morning we pray scripture.
At midday we pray compassion and in the evening we pray examine.
And here's why.
Monks, nuns, and foxes, they all wear habits.
The habits that we cultivate intentionally or unintentionally are probably the most powerful shaping force in our lives.
The psychological consensus is that about 40% to 45% of what human beings do each and every day is habit, not conscious choice.
Meaning roughly half your life is on autopilot.
You do get to choose though.
the practices programmed into your autopilot system.
You wear a habit too.
Clothe yourself in some set of rituals, and those rituals will play a sovereign role in your life that will shape your becoming.
A prayer shaped life begins just with the daily, ordinary wearing of a habit that keeps me awake with Jesus.
awake to the only story that is true enough that it resounds in the deepest part of my soul, awake to the only self that is true enough that I can, it know and live in that self right now and taste eternal life, and awake to the hope that only Jesus stayed awake to and gets in the knee, discovering that he invited me to follow my knees next to him in his dark night, also that I could see him falling on his knees next to me in my own.
And those who don't just
long for this kind of life, but cultivate it, who imperfectly but intentionally through a daily recommitment to pause three times a day and pray in three ways in an equal commitment to get there by the pace of God's grace, not my perfection.
Those who cultivate the prayer life that they dream of, well, they will discover what monks and foxes know, that this habit I wear, it is not restraining or restricting me.
It is freeing me to joy.
to playfulness and to fullness of life.
Why don't we stand and we'll respond together.
Thanks for joining the Bridgestown family as we engage in this teaching series.
To learn more about the life of our church and how you can get involved, visit bridgestown.church.com.
If you're interested in contributing financially to Bridgestown Church and to our ministry, you can do that at bridgestown.church.gov.
Wherever you're joining us from, we hope this resource blesses you and encourages you to be with Jesus, become like Jesus, and do what Jesus did.